JUDY WOODRUFF: This is an
important week for the fate of
a bill designed to replace and
potentially overhaul the
health care law often
referred to as Obamacare.
Republican senators are
trying to finish drafting
key portions of their own
bill affecting coverage
and costs.
But Democrats say the entire
battle over repealing the
law is quite different
from standard operating
procedure, and not nearly
transparent enough.
Lisa Desjardins looks at how
it's playing out in the Senate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right now
the debate over health care is
red hot in Congress, but only
behind closed doors, as
Republicans privately try
to craft a Senate bill.
And that is something Democrats,
like Senator Claire McCaskill
last week, have been raising
publicly.
SEN.
CLAIRE MCCASKILL (D),
Missouri: We have no idea
what's being proposed.
There's a group of guys in
a backroom somewhere that
are making these decisions.
There were no
hearings in the House.
I mean, listen, this is hard
to take, because I know we
made mistakes on the Affordable
Health Care Act, Mr. Secretary.
And one of the criticisms
we got over and over again,
that the vote was partisan.
Well, you couldn't have a more
partisan exercise than what
you're engaged in right now.
We're not even going to have a
hearing on a bill that impacts
one-sixth of our economy.
LISA DESJARDINS: McCaskill wants
something called regular order.
What is that?
Well, it used to be
the normal process.
A bill goes through committee
hearings, where experts and
those affected by an issue ring
in.
Then senators on the
committee can vote to change
the bill with amendments.
And then, when a bill gets to
the Senate floor, regular order
means another chance to change
it with amendment
votes there too.
In 2009, with the Affordable
Care Act, two Senate committees
held three months of hearings
and went through weeks
of voting on amendments.
More recently, Senate Leader
Mitch McConnell said he wanted
regular order when Republicans
took over in 2015.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: We need to open up,
open up the legislative process
in a way that allows more
amendments from both sides.
LISA DESJARDINS: But that's
not how Republicans so far have
planned this health care debate.
Again, in regular order,
bills go through committees
and amendment votes.
Instead, this time
around, Senate Republicans
have indicated they
may send their health
care bill straight to the
Senate floor with little,
maybe no chance to amend it.
And they have held no
hearings on the bill so far.
Leading this process is
Republican Senate Finance
Chairman Orrin Hatch.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah: Well,
I don't know that there's
going to be another hearing,
but we have invited
you to participate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Who stressed
to McCaskill that he wants
Democratic ideas, if not more
hearings and votes.
But that differs from Hatch
in 2009, when Republicans were
the minority, and he thought
Democrats were moving
too fast on health care.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH: We at
least ought to take the
time to do this right.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the end,
it took Democrats 14 months to
pass their health care bill in
2009 and 2010.
That's why this
moment is critical.
The Senate will make or
break health care reform.
And Senate leaders, including
Hatch, have said they want
to pass a full health care
bill by the end of this month.
That's just nine or 10
legislative days away.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.